# Massively-parallel-variant-to-function-mapping-determines-regulatory-functional-variants-of-NSCLC
Welcome to the GitHub repository for the project titled "Massively parallel variant-to-function mapping determines regulatory functional variants of non-small cell lung cancer." This project focuses on identifying and understanding the regulatory functional variants associated with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) using MPRA and advanced computational techniques.

Abstract: Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have identified thousands of genetic variants associated with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), however, it is still challenging to determine the causal variants from these associations and to eventually utilize them to improve disease risk prediction. Here, we applied massively parallel reporter assays (MPRAs) to perform NSCLC variant-to-function mapping at scale. A total of 1,249 candidate variants, which were identified by our previous GWAS involving 14,240 NSCLC cases and 14,813 control individuals with Chinese ancestry, were evaluated, and 82 of them were proved to be functional regulatory. Through the integration of lung-specific annotations, 30 potential causal variants within 12 loci were identified. The causal variants at nine loci were not the lead SNPs of GWAS, and seven loci harbored more than one causal variant. Accordingly, we proposed three potential genetic architectures underlying NSCLC susceptibility: multiple causal variants in a single haplotype block (e.g. 4q22.1), multiple causal variants in multiple haplotype blocks (e.g. 5p15.33), and a single causal variant (e.g. 20q11.23). The causal variants and their target genes at the loci mentioned above were validated by subsequent experiments. Finally, we incorporated the causal variants from Chinese populations to develop a modified polygenic risk score (PRS) and evaluated it in a cohort of 450,821 Europeans from the UK Biobank datasets. We observed a great improvement in the performance of risk prediction, even in a cross-ancestry population. Our findings not only augment the understanding of the genetic architecture underlying NSCLC susceptibility but also provide strategy to advance lung cancer risk stratification.

Data files are organized in the data/ directory.
For detailed descriptions of each dataset, refer to data/README.md
